423 satre faqs   re write (#568)
sa-tre/satre-specification: docs/source/faqs.md

The specification was developed to address the lack of TRE‑specific guidance and to provide a consistent framework for designing, operating, and evaluating Trusted Research Environments. Its aim is to improve trust, interoperability, and efficiency by defining shared capabilities and enabling organisations to assess and enhance their TREs in a structured way.

(who_developed)=

## Who has developed the SATRE specification?

The SATRE specification has been developed by the UK Trusted Research Environment community, led by a collaboration of organisations including the University of Dundee, University College London, the Alan Turing Institute, and partners across academia, healthcare, industry, and government.
It is a community‑driven effort, involving contributions from over 60 organisations, ensuring that the specification reflects shared experience, best practice, and the needs of those building and operating TREs in the UK.

(how_structured)=

## How is SATRE structured?

> SATRE is structured as a specification that defines the key capabilities required to design, build, and operate a TRE. It is organised around four core pillars—such as information governance, computing technology, and data management—supported by a set of capabilities and detailed statements that describe expected practices. Together, these provide a consistent way to understand how a TRE should function across all aspects of its operation.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
SATRE is structured as a specification that defines the key capabilities required to design, build, and operate a TRE. It is organised around five core pillars.
Four of these pillars are relevant to all TREs (information governance, computing technology, data management, supporting capabilities), and a fifth pillar covers federated TREs.
Together, these provide a consistent way to understand how a TRE should function across all aspects of its operation.

```

It can be used to inform the development process of new TREs, or to evaluate existing TREs and inform how they could be improved.
Evaluating a TRE with the SATRE specification may help to identify which technical standards (e.g. ISO 27001) are already met and which (if any) are desirable to work towards meeting.

(relate_standards)=

## How does SATRE relate to other standards?

SATRE is designed to complement, not replace, existing standards and frameworks. It is not an ISO technical standard; instead, it provides a structured approach to understanding and improving Security Awareness, Training, and Education (SATE) capability. While standards such as ISO/IEC 27001 or the NIST Cybersecurity Framework set out what organisations should do, SATRE focuses on how effectively those expectations are delivered through people and behaviour.

> 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
SATRE is designed to complement, not replace, existing standards and frameworks. Standards such as ISO/IEC 27001 or the NIST Cybersecurity are a good baseline for information security in organisations, but SATRE is focussed on TREs.
For example, SATRE adds requirements on public involvement and engagement if you hold publicly owned data.

```
Did we decide on a term for "publicly owned data"?

(how_long)=

## How long does it take to implement or evaluate SATRE?

The time required will vary depending on factors such as the size and maturity of the TRE, availability of evidence, and level of detail in the evaluation (e.g. simple scoring vs. full justification and improvement planning).

As a guideline, if you have the relevant information governance and operations team members available it should take a maximum of two days.

(operator_gain)=

## What do TRE {ref}`Operators <infrastructure_roles>` gain by evaluating their TRE with SATRE?

See: {ref}`why_evaluate`

(what_is_compliance)=

## What does compliance mean?

Compliance, in the context of SATRE, refers to meeting defined requirements or obligations set by standards, regulations, or organisational policies. This often focuses on whether specific controls or activities—such as delivering training or maintaining records—are in place as expected.

> SATRE recognises that compliance alone does not ensure effectiveness. While it is important to demonstrate that requirements are met, SATRE emphasises going beyond compliance to understand whether security awareness and training activities are actually influencing behaviours and contributing to better security outcomes.

Reviewer: > security awareness and training activities are actually influencing behaviours and contributing to better security outcomes.

Need to reword this, or take it out.

Some of the non-mandatory capabilities will likely not be needed for TREs containing data that does not require all the possible protections, and there may well be tradeoffs to be made in terms of accessibility vs security that depend on the data the TRE holds.
A future specification may include the idea of different archetypes of TREs, or data sensitivity tiers, with different requirements for each.

(who_is_using)=

## Who is currently using SATRE?

SATRE is being adopted and used by a growing range of organisations across the UK TRE community, including academic institutions, NHS environments, and research organisations.

> Examples published on the SATRE community site include the Scottish National Safe Haven, Grampian Data Safe Haven, Health Informatics Centre (University of Dundee), and the East of England SDE, among others. These organisations have used SATRE to evaluate and improve their TREs and to share their results with the wider community.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Examples published on the SATRE community site include the the Scottish National and regional Safe Havens, the East of England SDE, plus links to some commercial evaluations. These organisations have used SATRE to evaluate and improve their TREs and to share their results with the wider community.
```

SATRE is designed for broad use, so any organisation building or operating a Trusted Research Environment can adopt it and contribute to its continued development.

(support_federation)=

## Does SATRE describe approaches to TRE federation or interoperability of TREs?

Yes.
As of v2.0, SATRE includes a Federation Pillar which provides a framework for establishing and maintaining a SATRE-compliant TRE Federation.

(how_contribute)=

## How can I contribute to SATRE?

You can contribute to SATRE by engaging with the community and helping to improve the specification. This includes providing feedback, sharing your organisation’s evaluations, raising issues or suggestions via the [SATRE GitHub repositories](https://github.com/sa-tre/satre-specification), and participating in community discussions and events.

> SATRE is community-led, so contributions from TRE operators, developers, and users are actively encouraged to help refine and evolve the framework over time. Our [community website](https://satre.uktre.org/en/evaluations/) has a list of resources for following our project and connecting with us.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
SATRE is community-led, so contributions from TRE operators, developers, and users are actively encouraged to help refine and evolve the framework over time. Our [community website](https://satre.uktre.org/) has a list of resources for following our project and connecting with us.
```
